# Collective Problem Solving via Copying and Collaboration

This project explores how **collaboration and imitation (copying)** influence collective problem-solving performance in a dynamic multi-agent system. Inspired by real-world research environments, we model agents navigating an artificial fitness landscape while sharing and leveraging heterogeneous skills.

This project is inspired by and heavily based on the following research paper: 

Akçakır, G., Lang, J.C. & Lamberson, P.J. Copy or collaborate? How networks impact collective problem solving. npj Complex 2, 35 (2025). https://doi.org/10.1038/s44260-025-00058-8 
(GitHub: https://github.com/gulsahakcakir/Group-Problem-Solving)
  
---

## Project Description

People working together often solve problems more effectively than individuals working alone. This effect is especially pronounced in **multi-disciplinary research**, where individuals possess different knowledge and skills.

We model this phenomenon using a **2D agent-based system** consisting of a **100 × 100 lattice** on which **16 agents** move. Each position on the grid has:
- a **fitness value**, defined by a noisy fitness landscape with a clear global maximum
- a **skill type**, drawn from a finite set of skills

Agents aim to improve their individual payoff by moving across the landscape using two mechanisms:

- **Copying**: moving toward positions associated with higher fitness discovered by other agents
- **Collaborating**: expanding their search space by leveraging the skills of nearby agents

The model investigates how agents balance **exploration vs. exploitation** when searching for high-fitness regions using a **dynamic agent network** which includes turnover of agents.

---

## Research Motivation

Previous research has used similar models with **fixed agent networks** to study the optimal ratio between copying and collaboration.

In this project, we aim to extend the model by introducing **dynamic agent networks**, reflecting the fact that real-world systems are not stationary. Specifically, we propose:
- agents have a chance of being **removed** from the system (retirement)
- retired agents are **replaced** by new agents with new skills and positions

This allows us to study how **agent turnover** affects:
- the relative payoff of copying vs. collaborating
- overall collective performance

### Hypothesis

We hypothesize that increased turnover will:
- reduce the effectiveness of collaboration
- increase the relative payoff of copying behavior  
because fewer experienced agents are available for meaningful collaboration.

---

## Current Model Overview

The current implementation includes:

- A **Perlin-noise-based fitness landscape** with a well-defined global maximum
- Agents characterized by:
  - position
  - skill
  - payoff (fitness at their location)
- Two movement mechanisms:
  - **Copying (exploitation)**: 
    - possibility of moving to adjacent cells; OR
    - moving to cells of own skill within radius r; OR
    - moving to cell occupied by a neighbouring agents.
  - **Collaboration (exploration)**:
    - possibility of moving to adjacent cells; OR
    - moving to cells of own skill within radius r; OR
    - moving to cells with neighouring agents' skills within radius r
- A probabilistic choice between:
  - copying other agents’ positions
  - collaborating via skill-sharing
- An **interactive visualization** using Matplotlib

---

## Parameters

The following paramaters are kept constant across all tests:

```python
N = 100  # grid size (N x N)
S = 100  # number of skills
A = 16   # number of agents
r = 6    # collaboration radius
```

## Installation
Clone the repository and install the required dependencies:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Running Data / Getting Plots
For convenience, first set the tests folder as your working directory:
```bash
cd src/tests
```
Then collect the data by running the simulations:
```bash
python gridSearchParallel.py --num_threads=75 --p_steps=31 --t_steps=31 --n_samples=1000 --output=grid_search_results_1000_samples_20_steps.npy
# TODO add the other tests that generate saved data
```
Because some of these tests can take up to an hour, you can instead run the reduced quality version below:
```bash
python gridSearchParallel.py --num_threads=4 --p_steps=3 --t_steps=3 --n_samples=20 --output=grid_search_results_20_samples_20_steps.npy
# TODO add the other tests that generate saved data
```

Then plot the results with:
```bash
python gridSearchVisualization.py 
```

---

## Documentation
The documentation can be generated by running:
```bash
cd src
pdoc --html -o ../documentation . 
```
The documentation can then be viewed by opening `documentation/index.html`

## Authors
Sooriya Karunaharan, Alara Karadeniz, Ivo Blok, Gileesa McCormack

University of Amsterdam / Msc Compuational Science / Complex System Simulation Course
